# zsh 5.4 release notes

## New features

- The `exec` and `command` precommand modifiers, and options to them, are now
  parsed after parameter expansion. Previously, both the modifier and any
  options to it were parsed between alias expansion and parameter epansion (see
  `zshexpn(1)`), so they could neither be quoted nor be the result of parameter
  expansion. Examples: `s=command; $s -V ls` and `\command -V ls` now work as
  expected.

- There is an option `WARN_NESTED_VAR`, a companion to the existing
  `WARN_CREATE_GLOBAL` that causes a warning if a function updates a variable
  from an enclosing scope without using `typeset -g`. It can be turned on for an
  individual function with `functions -W`.

- `zmodload` now has an option `-s` to be silent on a failure to find a module
  but still print other errors.

- The `autoload` builtin gained several new features to load functions from a
  file path determined at the time of definition rather than at the time of
  loading.

- The `zsh/parameter` module now exposes the file paths associated with shell
  functions via the parameters `functions_source` and `dis_functions_source`.

## Incompatibilities

- The default behaviour of code like the following has changed:

  ```
  alias foo='noglob foo'
  foo() { print function body; }
  ```

  When this is encountered in a start-up file, or other place where input was
  read line by line, `foo` is in command position and is expanded as an alias
  before the function definition takes place. In previous versions of the shell,
  this caused two functions `noglob` and `foo` to be defined. Any expansion of
  an alias in a function definition is nearly always an unintended effect, as
  well as hard to detect, so has been made an error. (The option
  `NO_MULTI_FUNC_DEF` turned this case into an error, but did not help with
  other cases and is off by default.) The alternative, of not expanding the
  alias, was rejected as it was more difficult to achieve in the parser and also
  would silently change the shell's behaviour between versions.

  A new option, `ALIAS_FUNC_DEF`, has been added, which can be set to make the
  shell behave as in previous versions.  It is in any case recommended to use
  the `function` keyword, as aliases are not expanded afterwards.

- It was an undocumented, and largely useless, feature that a function
  autoloaded with an absolute path was searched for along the normal `fpath` (as
  if the leading `/` was missing) and, if found, loaded under the full name
  including the leading slash. This has been replaced with the more useful
  feature that the function is searched for only at the given absolute path; the
  name of the function is the base name of the file. Note that functions
  including a non-leading `/` behave as before, e.g. if `dir/name` is found
  anywhere under a directory in `fpath` it is loaded as a function named
  `dir/name`.

- `vcs_info`: When neither a `set-patch-format` nor a `gen-applied-string`
  (resp. `gen-unapplied-string`) hook is set, `vcs_info` now `%`-escapes the
  `applied-string` (resp. `unapplied-string`) before interpolating it into the
  `patch-format` string, to prevent literal `%` signs in the interpolated value
  from being interpreted as prompt escape sequences. If you use
  `$vcs_info_msg_0_` in a context other than the shell prompt, you may need to
  undo the escaping with:

  ```
  print -v vcs_info_msg_0_ -Pr -- "${vcs_info_msg_0_}"
  ```

  This is also needed if `$vcs_info_msg_0_` is used to set `psvar`.

- Functions executed by ZLE widgets no longer have their standard input closed,
  but redirected from `/dev/null` instead. That still guards against user
  defined widgets inadvertently reading from the tty device, and addresses the
  antisocial behaviour of running a command with its `stdin` closed.
