# zsh 5.5 release notes

## New features

- The effect of the `NO_INTERACTIVE_COMMENTS` option extends into `$(...)` and
  `` `...` `` command substitutions when used on the command line.  Previously,
  comments were always recognized within command substitutions unless the
  comment character `#` was disabled via reset of `histchars`.

- An alternative assignment syntax for indicating indices for arrays and keys
  for associative arrays --

  ```
  typeset -a array=([1]=first [2]=second)
  typeset -A assoc=([key1]=val1 [key2]=val2)
  ```

  -- is allowed for compatibility with other shells. In the case of normal
  arrays the new syntax can be mixed with the old.

- The `%E`, `%S`, and `%U` `TIMEFMT` specifiers now support `m` and `u` prefixes
  (e.g., `%mE`) to output times in milliseconds and microseconds, respectively.

- The option `CHECK_RUNNING_JOBS` was added to control whether zsh should check
  for running jobs in addition to suspended ones with `CHECK_JOBS`. It is
  enabled by default.

## Incompatibilities

- The default build-time maximum nested function depth has been decreased from
  1000 to 500 based on user experience. However, it can now be changed at run
  time via the variable `FUNCNEST`. If you previously configured the shell to
  set a different value, or to remove the check, this is now reflected in the
  default value of the variable.

- The syntax

  ```
  foo=([key]=value)
  ```

  can be used to set elements of arrays and associative arrays. In the unlikely
  event that you need to set an array by matching files using a pattern that
  starts with a character range followed by `=`, you need to quote the `=`,
  e.g.:

  ```
  foo=([aeiou]\=vowel)
  ```

  This is only required for array values contained within parentheses; command
  line expansion for normal arguments has not changed.

- The syntax

  ```
  [[ -o foo ]]
  ```

  where `foo` is not the name of a shell option (with optional underscores and
  optional `no` prefix) used to be treated as a syntax error, i.e., the
  enclosing command line or file were aborted. It now emits a warning and
  returns a non-zero exit code. For further details, see the documentation of
  the `-o` switch in the chapter "Conditional Expressions" in the `zshmisc(1)`
  manual.
