# zsh 5.6 release notes

## Security fixes

- **CVE-2018-0502**: Data from the second line of a `#!` script file might be
  passed to `execve()`. For example, given

  ```
  printf '#!foo\nbar' > baz
  ./baz
  ```

  the shell might take `bar` rather than `foo` for the `argv[0]` to be passed to
  `execve()`.

  *Reported by Anthony Sottile and Buck Evan.*

- **CVE-2018-13259**: A shebang line longer than 64 characters would be
  truncated. For example, given

  ```
  ( printf '#!'; repeat 64 printf 'x'; printf 'y' ) > foo
  ./foo
  ```

  the shell might execute `x...x` (64 repetitions) rather than `x...xy` (64
  `x`s, one `y`).

  **Reported by Daniel Shahaf.**

## New features

- Non-stop IEEE 754 arithmetic support: `Inf` and `NaN` are now returned from
  floating point operations where errors were printed before. `Inf` and `NaN`
  are also recognised in arithmetic expressions.

- In shell patterns, `[[:blank:]]` now honours the locale instead of matching
  exclusively on space and tab, like for the other POSIX character classes or
  for extended regular expressions.

- The `zsh/system` module now provides the PID of the last process substitution
  via `sysparams[procsubstpid]`.

- Time formatting via the `%D` prompt escape now offers nanosecond precision
  with the `%.` and `%N` format specifiers. Additionally, nanosecond precision
  on file times is supported in the module `zsh/stat`.

- The `zsh/mathfunc` module now includes a `log2()` function.

- The parameter `ZLE_RECURSIVE` has been added to indicate the current ZLE
  recursion level.

## Incompatibilities

- The completion helper `_remote_files`, typically used after a hostname
  with `scp`-style completion, now uses `remote-files` instead of `files` as a
  tag. This makes it easier to restrict completions with the `tag-order` style.
