# zsh 5.8 release notes

## Security fixes

- **CVE-2019-20044**: When unsetting the `PRIVILEGED` option, the shell sets its
  effective user and group IDs to match their respective real IDs. On some
  platforms (including Linux and macOS, but not FreeBSD), when the RUID and EUID
  were both non-zero, it was possible to regain the shell's former privileges by
  e.g. assigning to the EUID or EGID parameter. In the course of investigating
  this issue, it was also found that the `setopt` built-in did not correctly
  report errors when unsetting the option, which prevented users from handling
  them as the documentation recommended. `setopt` now returns non-zero if it is
  unable to safely drop privileges.

  *Reported by Sam Foxman <<samfoxman320@gmail.com>>.*

## New features

- The `zsh/zutil` module's `zparseopts` builtin learnt an `-F` option to abort
  parsing when an unrecognised option-like parameter is encountered.

- The `zsh/files` module gained a `chmod` builtin.

- Several changes have been made to the way completion functions track
  'precommands' (such as `command` and `env`) and determine whether the command
  being completed for is a shell builtin. Developers of completion functions may
  wish to familiarise themselves with `_normal -p` and `_pick_variant -b`.

- The option `CD_SILENT` was added to suppress all output from `cd` (whether
  explicit or implicit with `AUTO_CD`). It is disabled by default.

- The `compadd` builtin's `-o` option now takes an optional argument to specify
  the order of completion matches. This affects the display of candidate matches
  and the order in which they are selected when cycling between them using menu
  completion.

- The `:h` and `:t` modifiers in parameter expansion (if braces are present),
  glob qualifiers and history expansion may take following decimal digit
  arguments in order to keep that many leading or trailing path components
  instead of the defaults of all but one (`:h`) and one (`:t`). In an absolute
  path the leading `/` counts as one component.

- The `functions` builtin gained a `-c` option to efficiently copy functions.

## Incompatibilities

- The history expansion `!:1:t2` used to be interpreted such that the `2` was a
  separate character added after the history expansion. Now it is an argument to
  the `:t` modifier. For example

  ```
  % echo /my/interesting/path
  % echo !:1:t2
  ```

  used to echo `path2`, but now echoes `interesting/path`.

  The behaviour of `:h` has similarly changed.

  The behaviour has also changed in forms such as `${foo:t2)` and `*(:t2)`, but
  in those cases the previous behaviour was not meaningful.

- The `vcs_info` function `VCS_INFO_quilt-dirfind` now returns a string value
  by setting `REPLY`. Previously it printed the value to standard output. This
  only affects you if you override that function in your dotfiles.

- The `cd` and `chdir` builtins no longer interpret operands like `-1` and `+2`
  as stack entries when `POSIX_CD` is enabled.

- Dropping privileges with `unsetopt privileged` may fail (with an error
  message) on some older and uncommon platforms due to library dependency
  changes made in the course of fixing CVE-2019-20044. Please report this to
  the `zsh-workers` mailing list if your system is affected. See above for more.

## Other

- The `zshmisc(1)` manual page incorrectly stated that when `exit` is used in a
  `try` block inside a function, the corresponding `always` block will be
  executed. The manual page has been corrected. The shell's behaviour has not
  changed, but code such as the following:

  ```
  f() { { exit } always { echo Hello world } }
  ```

  should be changed either to use `return` instead of `exit`, or to have the
  `try`/`always` block outside of any function.
