# zsh 5.9 release notes

## Dedication

zsh 5.9 is dedicated to the memory of Sven Guckes, who was, amongst other
things, a long-time zsh advocate.  For more information, see:

- <https://linuxnews.de/2022/02/sven-guckes-verstorben/>
- <https://groups.google.com/g/vim_announce/c/MJBKVd-xrEE/m/joVNaDgAAgAJ>

## Security fixes

n/a

## New features

- When unsetting a hash element, the string enclosed in square brackets is
  interpreted literally after any normal command-line-argument expansions. Thus

  ```
  unset "hash[$key]"
  ```

  first expands `$key` as usual for a double-quoted string, and then interprets
  that result as the exact hash element to unset. This differs from previous
  versions of the shell, which would also remove a leading backslash for an
  unusual subset of characters in the expansion of $key. Note this also means,
  for example, that now

  ```
  unset 'hash[ab]cd]'
  ```

  unsets the element with key `ab]cd` rather than silently doing nothing.

- The `function` command learnt a `-T` option to declare a function and enable
  tracing for it simultaneously.

- The option `SHORT_REPEAT` was added to enable the short syntax of
  `SHORT_LOOPS` for the `repeat` command only. It is disabled by default.

- The `_arguments` function now supports `NUL`-delimiting optargs in the
  `opt_args` array via the `-0` option. Developers of completion functions
  should find this easier to handle reliably than the default colon-delimiting
  behaviour.

- The `zsh/system` module's `zsystem flock` command learnt an `-i` option to
  set the wait interval used with `-t`. Additionally, `-t` now supports
  fractional seconds.

- The option `CLOBBER_EMPTY` was added to enable the overwrite behaviour of
  `CLOBBER` for empty files only. It is disabled by default.

- A `(-)` expansion flag was added. It works like `(n)` but correctly sorts
  negative numbers.

- The `(*)` expansion flag enables `EXTENDED_GLOB` for pattern matching. For
  example, `${(*)sample/(#b)*(pat)*/${match[1]}}` uses backreferences even if
  `EXTENDED_GLOB` is not otherwise set. However, this does not descend into
  nested expansions, and doubling as `(**)` does not disable `EXTENDED_GLOB`.

- The `compinit` function learnt a `-w` option to explain why `compdump` runs.

- When `compinit` is run without the `-i` or `-u` option and `compaudit`
  discovers security issues, answering `y` to the "Ignore insecure ..." prompt
  removes the insecure elements (like the `-i` option) where previously it
  ignored the result (thus formerly like the `-u` option). Further, removing
  those elements includes dropping directories from the `fpath` array.

- The `zsh/datetime` module's `strftime` builtin learnt an `-n` option to omit
  the trailing newline when printing a formatted time.

- The `XTRACE` option is now disabled while running user-defined completion
  widgets. This corresponds to long-standing behavior of other user ZLE widgets.
  Use the `_complete_debug` widget to capture `XTRACE` output, or use
  `functions -T` to enable tracing of specific completion functions.

- The `fc` builtin learnt an `-s` option which is a POSIX equivalent to the
  `fc -e-` method of re-executing a command without invoking an editor.

- The option `CASE_PATHS` was added to control how `NO_CASE_GLOB` behaves.
  `NO_CASE_GLOB` + `NO_CASE_PATHS` is equivalent to the current `NO_CASE_GLOB`
  behaviour. `NO_CASE_GLOB` + `CASE_PATHS` treats only path components that
  contain globbing characters as case-insensitive; this behaviour may yield more
  predictable results on case-sensitive file systems. `NO_CASE_PATHS` is the
  default.

- With the new `TYPESET_TO_UNSET` option set, `typeset foo` leaves `foo` unset,
  in contrast to the default behavior which assigns `foo=""`. Any parameter
  attributes such as numeric type, sorting, and padding are retained until the
  parameter is explicitly unset or a conflicting value is assigned. This is
  similar to the default behavior of bash and ksh. This option is disabled by
  default.

- The `compadd` builtin's `-D` option can now be supplied more than once.

- The `zsh/zutil` module's `zformat` builtin learnt an `-F` option which behaves
  like `-f` except that ternary expressions check for existence instead of doing
  math evaluation.

- The conventional syntax used to indicate units, ranges, and default values in
  completion descriptions (e.g. `timeout (seconds) (0-60) [20]`) is now
  recognised by the completion system itself. These components are parsed out of
  the description and can be individually styled. A `_numbers` helper function
  has been added to help function authors offer rich completion for these
  values.

- The `log` builtin, `WATCH` parameter, et al., have been broken out into a
  separate module, `zsh/watch`. The module is enabled by default.

- The `zsh/watch` module's `WATCHFMT` parameter now supports colours via the
  `%F` and `%K` escapes.

- The `STTY` parameter can now be set to an empty string before running a
  command to automatically restore terminal settings after the command finishes.

- The `jobs` command and `jobstates` and related parameters can report on parent
  shell jobs even in subshells. This is a snapshot of the parent state, frozen
  at the point the subshell started. However, if a subshell starts its own
  background jobs, the parent state is discarded in order to report on those new
  jobs.

## Incompatibilities

- `compinit`: A `y` response to the "Ignore ... and continue?" prompt removes
  insecure elements from the set of completion functions, where previously
  it ignored the `compaudit` result and included all elements.

- Build-time change: The default value of the `--enable-gdbm` `configure`
  argument has changed from `yes` to `no`.  Thus, the `zsh/db/gdbm` module will
  not be built unless `--enable-gdbm` is passed explicitly.

- `vcs_info` `quilt`: The value of the `quiltcommand` style used to be taken for
  the name of an external command. Now it may also be a shell function. Normal
  command word precedence rules apply, so if you have a function and a command
  with the same name, the function will be used.

- The `function` reserved word, used to define functions, gained a new `-T`
  option. That affects syntaxes such as:

  1. `function -T { ... }`. It used to define a function named `-T`. It now
     now defines and executes an anonymous function with single-level tracing
     enabled --- same as `function f { ... }; functions -T f; f`, but without
     naming the function.

  2. `function -T foo { ... }`. It used to define two functions, named `-T` and
     `foo` (see the `MULTI_FUNC_DEF` option). It now defines a function `foo`
     with tracing enabled.

  3. `function -- { ... }`. It used to define a function named `--`. It now
     defines and executes an anonymous function. The `--` is taken to be an
     end-of-options guard (same as `ls --`).

  The `sh`-compatible function definition syntax, `f() { ... }`, is unchanged.

- The time-out (`-t`) value given to `zsh/system`'s `zsystem flock` command is
  now limited to 2^30-1 seconds (= a little over 34 years).

- `zstyle`: For background, recall that the `zstyle` builtin associates styles
  with values for particular contexts, and when a context (such as
  `:foo:bar:baz`) is matched by multiple patterns (such as `:foo:*` and
  `:foo:bar:*`), the style's value for the more specific of the patterns is
  used. In zsh 5.8 and earlier the determination of which pattern is "more
  specific" used semantics slightly different to those the documentation
  promised. The implementation was changed to match the documentation. The
  upshot of this is that if you set a single style in multiple contexts, zsh 5.9
  may use the values set for a pattern other than the one zsh 5.8 used.

  For example, if you do

  ```
  zstyle ':foo:bar:*'   style value1
  zstyle ':foo:*:baz:*' style value2
  ```

  and the style is looked up under a context that both patterns match (e.g.,
  `:foo:bar:baz:qux`), zsh 5.9 will use `value2` -- which is consistent with the
  documentation of both 5.8 and 5.9 -- but zsh 5.8 will use `value1`. If this
  affects you, make the implied colons in the first pattern explicit, as in:

  ```
  zstyle ':foo:bar:*:*' style value1
  zstyle ':foo:*:baz:*' style value2
  ```

  This will use `value1` in both 5.8 and 5.9.

- Elements of the `region_highlight` array have gained a fourth space-separated
  field. Code written against 5.9 that sets the new field may break under 5.8:
  for example, the element `0 20 bold memo=foo`, which is valid under 5.9, would
  not work under 5.8. (Under the hood, 5.8 does not recognize the space as
  terminating the highlighting specification.) On the other hand, code that does
  not set the new, fourth field will continue to work under both 5.8 and 5.9.
  (As it happens, adding a comma after `bold` will make both 5.8 and 5.9 do the
  right thing, but this should be viewed as an unsupported hack.)

- The `XTRACE` option is now disabled while running user-defined completion
  widgets. See above.

- `emulate sh`: When zsh emulates `sh`, the final command in a pipeline is now
  run in a subshell. This differs from the behavior in the native (zsh) mode,
  but is consistent with most other `sh` implementations.

- The `export` and `readonly` builtins now ignore the `-p` option when there are
  operands given and `POSIX_BUILTINS` is enabled. This more closely matches the
  behaviour of bash and ksh.

- `getopts` now calculates `OPTIND` in a similar manner to other shells when the
  `POSIX_BUILTINS` option is enabled.

- Ignored-signal traps are now inherited by subshells when the `POSIX_TRAPS`
  option is enabled.

- `emulate sh`: `Inf` and `NaN` are now treated as parameter names in arithmetic
  context when zsh is emulating `sh`.

- The `${name:offset:length}` expansion syntax now behaves more similarly to
  other shells in that the offset and length are applied as array indices prior
  to scalar conversion in e.g. `${*:0:2}`.

- The optimization for the `=(<<<foo)` construct with no command, which creates
  a temporary file with contents `foo`, now adds a newline byte after `foo` for
  consistency with the behaviour of the `<<<` redirection everywhere else.
